ORGB 672 - Exercise 5 - Complex Contagion
================
Hugo Garcia (260791363)
Due on April 11th, 2023

## What is complex contagion and how is it different from simple contagion?

Complex contagion and simple contagion are two different models of how
behaviors, opinions, or diseases can spread through a network of
individuals.

Simple contagion, mainly inspired by disease spreading, stands for a
contagion process with independent interaction between the susceptible
and the infectious. This contagion assumes that the likelihood of
adopting a disease, behavior or opinion depends only on the number of
neighbors in the network who have already adopted it. This means that
each individual has a fixed probability of adopting the contagion,
regardless of how many times they are exposed to it. Models of simple
contagion are controlled by an infection probability independent of the
number of exposures.

Complex contagion assumes that the adoption of a contagion, like
behaviour or opinion, requires multiple exposures. This means that an
individual is more likely to adopt a contagion if they are exposed to it
multiple times from different sources or if they see multiple people in
their social network adopting it. The spread of fads, ideas, deviant
behavior, fashion trends, and new technologies in our society is better
described by complex contagion rather than by simple contagion due to a
collective effect.

In summary, the main difference between complex and simple contagion
lies in the number of exposures or sources required for the
behavior/opinion to spread. While simple contagion assumes that a single
exposure is sufficient, complex contagion requires multiple exposures or
reinforcement from different sources.

## What does complex contagion mean for diffusion of behaviors in organizations?

In an organizational context, complex contagion suggests that the
diffusion of new behaviors, ideas, or practices will require multiple
exposures or reinforcement from different sources within the
organization to overcome resistance or inertia that exists in the
current system. This would create a sense of legitimacy and social proof
that can increase the likelihood of adoption.

Example 1): Introducing a new tool in the employee workflow. If the
company wants employees to start using the new software tool, they
should be mindful of the exposure employees get before they are asked to
adopt it. Giving employees multiple exposures from different sources
such as training sessions, meetings, and demonstrations, will allow
employees time to understand the benefits or how it fits into their
existing work processes and increase the chances of adoption.

Example 2): Introducing a new ethical code of conduct to employees. If
the company simply sends out a memo or email to all employees outlining
the new code of conduct, this may not be enough to ensure that the code
is fully understood and adopted by all employees - this would be the
simple contagion assumption.

Leaders should consider complex contagion networks and effects within
their organization when introducing new behaviors or practices, as it
suggests that multiple exposures or communication efforts from different
sources may be needed for successful diffusion.

## How can we use the threshold models to better manage:

Threshold models can be used to identify the tipping points at which
contagions become self-sustaining within the organization. These tipping
points occur when a critical amount individuals, based on relative % and
adoption thresholds, have adopted a new behavior or attitude, and the
behavior or attitude becomes the new norm within the organization.

### 1) Prosocial behavior in organizations?

Identifying key factors that influence the adoption of prosocial
behaviors, as well as the tipping points that can trigger widespread
adoption.

Identify individuals in the organization who are most influential in
terms of spreading prosocial behaviors - “social influencers” or
“opinion leaders” - with a high degree of social capital within the
organization.

Target these individuals and encouraging them to adopt prosocial
behaviors, the organization can increase the likelihood that these
behaviors will spread to others.

### 2) Learning behavior in organizations?

Identifying the key factors that influence the adoption of new knowledge
and skills, as well as the tipping points that can trigger widespread
adoption.

Identify individuals or groups who are most likely to adopt new
knowledge and skills - “early adopters” - with a higher tolerance for
risk and a greater openness to new ideas.

Target these individuals and provide them with the resources and support
they need to learn and develop new skills, which organizations can then
use to increase the likelihood that these behaviors will spread.

### 3) Toxic or unproductive behaviors in organizations?

Identifying the key factors that influence the adoption of these toxic
and unproductive behaviors, as well as the tipping points that can
trigger widespread adoption.

Identify individuals or groups who are most likely to engage in these
behaviors - “toxic influencers” or “negative opinion leaders” - and who
can have a significant impact on the attitudes and behaviors of others
in the organization.

Target these individuals with calculated interventions and work on
changing their attitudes and behaviors, to reduce the likelihood that
toxic or unproductive behaviors will spread to others.

### In summary

Threshold models help to better understand the social dynamics that
influence prosocial, learning and toxic behaviors within organizations,
which leaders can use to develop more effective strategies for managing
and promoting these behaviors. In addition, by understanding tipping
points, leaders can work to create interventions that encourage
widespread adoption of:

1.  Prosocial behaviors, which can lead to positive outcomes such as
    increased productivity, better collaboration, and improved employee
    satisfaction.

2.  Learning behaviors, which can lead to positive outcomes such as
    improved performance, increased innovation, and greater employee
    engagement.

3.  Toxic or unproductive behaviors, which can lead to positive outcomes
    such as increased collaboration, improved communication, and greater
    employee satisfaction.
